docs: add docs for inflation (#2172)
umee-network/umee: app/inflation/README.md

   - The supply will measured by total supply of $UMEE on network.

5. All inflationary tokens will be distributed to stakers and delegators, similar to the current mechanism.

6. **Umee governance will have the power to vote and modify these inflation parameters if the external environment significantly changes, necessitating a different approach.**

## Technical Specification

The Inflation Params will be stored in the `x/ugov` module:

```go
// maximum supply in base denom (uumee) 
max_supply       sdk.Coin
// length of the inflation cycle
inflation_cycle_duration  time.Duration
// in basis points. 12 corresponds to 0.012. New inflation is calculated as:
// old_inflation * (10'000 - inflation_reduction_rate)/10'000
inflation_reduction_rate bpmath.FixedBP
```

See [Ugov Proto](https://github.com/umee-network/umee/blob/main/proto/umee/ugov/v1/ugov.proto) for inflation params

### InflationCalculationFn

The inflation calculation logic will be implemented as follows:

```go pseudocode
Input: sdk.Context, minter, mint module params , bondedRatio
Output: Inflation 

> Procedure inflationRate(ctx , minter, mintParams, bondedRatio):

Reviewer: this can be change to function (and the END PROCEDURE below can be removed)

Author: ok

# UMEE Tokenomic Restructuring Proposal

## Introduction

The UMEE Tokenomic Restructuring proposal aims to optimize the tokenomics of the $UMEE token, which is issued following the standard Cosmos SDK mechanism. The goal is to progressively limit the token issuance in an algorithmic way, taking into account various factors such as network security, adoption of liquid staking, and additional income sources for stakers through interchain security and chain-based revenue streams.

## Design Overview

> 1. The $UMEE 2.0 Tokenomics will adopt a similar Cosmos dynamic inflation mechanism based on the bonding rate of the network. This allows the Umee chain to naturally adjust the inflation rate to drive staking activities and reach the targeted bonding rate.

Reviewer: Similar to what?

(might need a rewording)

Author: Ok

> 2. To initiate the new tokenomics, the maximum and minimum inflation rates will decrease by 25%. Subsequent decreases will occur every two years.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. When these tokenomics changes take effect, the maximum and minimum inflation rates will immediately decrease by 25%. Subsequent decreases will occur every two years.
```

Author: Before this new token emission , we will reduce 20% of the current min and max inflation rate by Gov Proposal 

I will update this section

   - Current min and max inflation rates: 7% - 14%
   - New max and min inflation rates at the start: 5.6% - 11.2%

3. The max and min inflation rates will decrease by 25% every two years in inflation cycles. This is in anticipation of the growth of the Umee ecosystem and wider adoption of liquid staking.

   - Each inflation cycle will have a variable yearly total amount of newly emitted tokens.
   - At the end of each inflation cycle, the `min_inflation_rate`, `max_inflation_rate` will be decreased by 25%.

>    - The inflation rate change speed will be accelerated from 1 year to 6 months.

Reviewer: Maybe reference the existing `x/staking` module here, if it contains the parameter being modified

Author: We are modifying the mint module params 

Okay I will add link of mint module params  here

4. The total $UMEE supply will be capped at 21 billion tokens.

   - Inflation will be reduced during each inflation cycle until minting stops when the maximum supply is reached.
   - Minting will resume if the supply drops below 21 billion, and it will stop again once the 21 billion mark is reached.

>    - The supply will be `StakingTokenSupply`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - This supply cap is controlled by the `x/ugov` parameter `StakingTokenSupply`.
```
Would this change be correct?

Author: ` This supply cap` is the total supply of staking bonding token in network

5. All inflationary tokens will be distributed to stakers and delegators, similar to the current mechanism.

> 6. **Umee governance will have the power to vote and modify the `inflation params`` if the external environment significantly changes, necessitating a different approach.**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
6. **Umee governance will have the power to vote and modify these inflation parameters if the external environment significantly changes, necessitating a different approach.**
```

## Technical Specification

> The Inflation Params to be stored in the `x/ugov` module:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Inflation Params will be stored in the `x/ugov` module:
```

```go

> // max supply based on the bank/QueryTotalSupplyRequest 
> max_supply       sdk.Coin
> // length of the inflation cycle as described in the Design
> inflation_cycle_duration  time.Duration
> // in basis points. 12 corresponds to 0.012. New inflation is calculated as:
> // old_inflation * (10'000 - inflation_reduction_rate)/10'000
> inflation_reduction_rate sdk.Dec

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// maximum supply in base denom (uumee)
max_supply       sdk.Coin
// length of the inflation cycle
inflation_cycle_duration  time.Duration
// Reduction in inflation at the end of every cycle.
// For example, 0.25 means a 25% reduction
inflation_reduction_rate sdk.Dec
```
If it's listed as sdk.Dec here then basis points aren't needed in the comment

Author: `inflation_reduction_rate` is `bpmath.FixedBP`

```

See [Ugov Proto](https://github.com/umee-network/umee/blob/main/proto/umee/ugov/v1/ugov.proto) for inflation params

### InflationCalculationFn

The inflation calculation logic will be implemented as follows:

> ```bash

Reviewer: Is there a reason this is presented as a bash script?

It would be easier to read as a list of steps, or maybe as go pseudocode if comments and variable names were kept succinct

        // new inflation cycle is starting, so we need to update the inflation max and min rate
        factor = 1 - INFLATION_PARAMS.InflationReductionRate // 1 - 0.25 = 0.75
        mintParams.InflationMax = factor.MulDec(mintParams.InflationMax)
        mintParams.InflationMin = factor.MulDec(mintParams.InflationMin)

        MintKeeper.SetParams(ctx, mintParams)

        // SET CURRENT NEW INFLATION CYCLE END TIME IN UGOV STORE 
        CYCLE_END_TIME = ctx.BlockTime().Add(INFLATION_PARAMS.InflationCycle)

    Inflation = minttypes.DefaultInflationCalculationFn(ctx, minter, mintParams, bondedRatio)
    
    // if the newly minted coins will exceed the MaxSupply, and adjusts the inflation accordingly.
    MINTING_COINS =( Inflation * TOTAL_TOKENS_SUPPLY )/ mintParams.BlocksPerYear
    IF (MINTING_COINS + TOTAL_TOKENS_SUPPLY) > MAX_SUPPLY:
        MINTING_COINS = MAX_SUPPLY - TOTAL_TOKENS_SUPPLY
        Return Inflation = (MINTING_COINS * mintParams.BlocksPerYear) / TOTAL_TOKENS_SUPPLY
    
    Return Inflation

End Procedure
```

[Please Check here](https://github.com/umee-network/umee/blob/main/app/inflation/inflation.go) for above psudo code implementation

## Conclusion

> The UMEE Tokenomic Restructuring proposal aims to optimize the $UMEE token economics, providing a dynamic and adaptive mechanism for inflation adjustment based on the network's bonding rate. The proposed changes will support the growth of the Umee ecosystem and enhance the overall staking experience for validators and delegators. Umee governance retains the ability to adapt the inflation schedule if required to respond to external changes in the future.

Reviewer: Section might not be required

Author: Ok
